Hello again!
In this video, we are going to talk about algorithms and execution policies.
When execution policies came along in C++17, most of the algorithms in the standard library were
re-specified to support execution policies.
There were a few exceptions, which are algorithms which can really be only done sequentially. For example,
equal_range and iota.
There are some algorithms in  which are specified as being sequential-only.
They came up with
some new functions with different names, which support policies.
So there is a new version of accumulate called reduce.
And there are two new versions of partial_sum which are called inclusive and exclusive scan.
There's also a new "fused" algorithm which combines two separate algorithms: transform_reduce combines
transform and inner_product.
And we will be looking at these new functions later on in this section.
We need to talk about how exceptions are handled with algorithms. With the original non-policy algorithms,
it is very straightforward.
It is just like any other code. You have a try/catch block.
So you put the algorithm call inside the try block.
And if there is something that might throw, a lambda expression or maybe a functor. If there is an exception,
then it gets caught in the catch block and you can handle it there.
When you have an execution policy, that does not work because there are probably going to be multiple
threads executing in parallel. Each thread will have its own stack and you cannot transfer an exception
from one thread to another.
So the result is rather drastic. If an uncaught exception is thrown, the terminate function is called,
and by default that will end the program.
If we imagine we have an algorithm call, which is going to apply a function to every element in the
container. If this function throws an exception and handles the exception internally, so it does not escape
outside the function call, then the execution of the algorithm is going to continue.
If the applied function does not handle the exception itself or if it rethrows it, then it goes outside
the function call into the algorithm and then the algorithm will terminate.
It's also possible for the algorithm call itself to throw an exception, even if it does not call any
other functions.
If it needs some temporary memory resources, for example, to manage the new threads that it is creating
and it cannot obtain these, it is going to throw the standard bad_alloc exception.
Let's look at an example. We have got a vector of ints.
We are going to call the sort of algorithm.
We are going to use the entire range of elements in the vector.
So that is the data that is going to be sorted.
We are going to compare the elements by using a lambda expression, and this lambda expression is going
to throw an exception.
We are calling the sort algorithm inside a try blog, so we would expect that the exception would be caught
and handled in the catch block.
So let's see what happens.
So as we would expect, the exception is thrown.
It is caught in the catch block.
And that is exactly as we would expect. If we now add an execution policy...
So let's use sequential for simplicity and then let's see what happens.
So the program has terminated abnormally.
The reason for this is that an algorithm which uses an execution policy can start up multiple threads.
In C++, each thread has its own execution stack, and it is quite difficult to communicate exceptions
between threads.
There is the futures mechanism, but that would add overhead and it would defeat the object of using
parallel execution.
So instead, the program just terminates.
Now, you may be thinking that all this execution policy stuff sounds very exciting,
and you are going
to rush off and convert all your algorithm calls to use them.
But before you do that, there are some downsides that you need to think about.
The first one is that an execution policy may not actually do anything.
The reason for this is that compiler writers are still in the process of implementing execution policies
for algorithms.
The C++ language does give them plenty of freedom in this respect.
If they have not yet found an effective
parallel or vectorized algorithm,
they are allowed to supply a sequential implementation.
So it may be that you ask for parallel and vectorized and you still get sequential.
There is extra overhead involved, especially for the ones which do parallel processing.
The algorithm
will have to create threads and manage them,
and that all uses up CPU time.
There are things called complexity requirements which basically say how fast an algorithm has to run
for a given number of elements.
The old algorithms have complexity requirements, for example, if you're doing a sort, the number
of swap operations must be equal to or lower than the number of elements.
When you move on to parallel algorithms, you often find that algorithms that work well in parallel
have more operations than ones which work well sequentially.
So they actually perform more operations.
But because they run in parallel, they take less time overall.
So this means that the parallel algorithms may have weaker complexity requirements than the original
ones or even no requirements at all. Obviously compiler writers want to have the most efficient
implementations possible, for benchmarks. But it may be they have not found a good one yet,
so they
can put in a suboptimal one.
So that might be a problem.
Some of these problems are going to go away, of course, once there is better compiler support.
So when should we use an execution policy?
The best advice is not to use one at all unless you know that you need one.
There's a famous saying, which I think every programmer we should have stuck on their wall, which is "premature
optimization is the root of all evil".
The reasoning behind that is when you try to optimize, you often create complicated code, which is
hard to understand and more difficult to get
right.
What you should do is to get clear, understandable, well-structured code that produces the correct
answers,
and then try to speed it up.
Some situations where you should definitely not use an execution policy: If you have a task which is
best done sequentially.
For example, incrementing the value of each element in turn.
If the order of operations is important.
if you try to re-order subtractions, then you will get some very wrong results.
If the algorithm is going to call a function which might throw an exception,
and immediately terminating
the program is not acceptable.
If the code involves data races, then parallel execution means that you will need to protect against a
data race, and the cost of locking a mutex or using an atomic variable is probably going to be much greater
than the cost of not having an execution policy.
On the other hand, you should consider using an execution policy if measuring the performance of your
program shows a definite and worthwhile improvement in performance. And of course, providing you can
do it safely and correctly.
So which execution policy should you use? Sequential execution.
may sound a bit pointless, but in fact it is useful for debugging.
The reason for that is that sequential execution is much easier to understand than parallel or vectorized
execution.
So it is much easier to spot when something is going wrong.
This is almost the same as the non policy version, but it allows out of order execution and
if any exceptions are thrown, it will terminate immediately.
The obvious one to use is parallel unsequenced execution, which is both parallel and vector instructions.
So that should give the biggest improvement in performance, but it also has the strictest requirements.
You need to make sure there cannot be any data races and you need to make sure that the code does not modify
shared state.
So you need to avoid allocating and deallocating memory, and you also need to avoid mutexes, which
rather conflicts with the data race [avoidance].
So this is best really for pure numerical work.
Parallel execution can be used when vectorization is not safe.
So if you are going to be locking mutexes or operating on memory.
Unsequenced execution in C++20. That is just vectorization on its own.
You can even use that in a
single threaded program.
The only requirement is that the code doesn't modify shared state.
OK, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.
But meanwhile, keep coding!